Real-Time Face Recognition with Live Webcam
Overview

This project implements a real-time face recognition system using Python, OpenCV, and the face_recognition library. The system can:

Detect faces in a live webcam feed.

Identify known faces from a dataset.

Label unknown faces and allow the user to enter a name to add them to the dataset in real-time.

Draw rectangles around faces with names displayed on the video feed.

This allows for self-learning face recognition where new faces can be added dynamically.

Features

Real-time face detection and recognition using a webcam.

Unknown faces are highlighted and users can assign names.

Automatically stores new face images and updates the recognition dataset.

Displays labeled rectangles around all detected faces.

Press 'q' to quit the application.

Libraries and Models Used

Python 3.10+

OpenCV (cv2): Used for accessing the webcam, displaying video, and drawing rectangles.

face_recognition: Provides face detection and encoding.

Internally uses dlib's CNN/HoG-based face detection and ResNet-encoded embeddings.

Supports comparing face encodings to identify known faces.

NumPy: For array operations and handling image data.

OS module: To manage the dataset folder and files.

How the Code Works

Dataset Setup:

A folder named faces stores images of known people.

Each image is named after the person (e.g., John.jpg).

Load Known Faces:

The code loads all images in the faces folder.

Converts each image into a 128-dimensional face encoding using face_recognition.face_encodings.

Maintains a list of known_face_encodings and corresponding known_face_names.

Start Webcam:

The webcam feed is captured frame by frame using OpenCV.

Each frame is converted from BGR (OpenCV format) to RGB (required by face_recognition).

Face Detection and Recognition:

Detects all faces in the current frame (face_recognition.face_locations).

Encodes each detected face (face_recognition.face_encodings).

Compares the encoding with known faces using face_recognition.compare_faces and face_recognition.face_distance.

Assigns the correct name if matched, otherwise marks as "Unknown".

Handling Unknown Faces:

If a face is unknown, a popup shows the cropped face.

The user is prompted to enter a name.

The new face is saved to the faces folder, encoded, and added to the known faces list dynamically.

Next frames recognize this new face immediately.

Drawing Rectangles and Labels:

Draws a red rectangle around each face.

Displays the person's name (or "Unknown") below the rectangle.

Exit:

Press 'q' to exit the program gracefully.

Releases the webcam and closes all OpenCV windows.

Folder Structure
Face-Recognition/
│
├── faces/                  # Folder storing face images
│   ├── John.jpg
│   ├── Alice.jpg
│   └── ...
│
├── facerecognition.py      # Main Python script
├── README.md               # Project documentation
└── requirements.txt        # Required libraries

Requirements

Install the necessary Python libraries:

pip install opencv-python
pip install face-recognition
pip install numpy


Note: face-recognition depends on dlib. Ensure you have a compatible version installed:

pip install dlib==19.24.2

How to Run

Open a terminal in the project directory.

Run the script:

python facerecognition.py


Allow webcam access if prompted.

If unknown faces appear, enter the name when prompted.

Press 'q' to quit the program.

Notes

Ensure good lighting for accurate face detection.

Keep the camera steady to avoid blurry frames.

The system works best when faces are frontal and clearly visible.